content/post/2022-01-18-lidar-metrics-for-forest-microclimate/index.md, before:

---
title:       "About Lidar Metrics and forest microclimate"
description: "Post about which Lidar metrics can be used to describe forest microclimate and how they are calculated"
date:        2022-01-17
author:      "Ivo Jung"
image:       "img/ungabunga.jpg" 
categories: ["aGIS"]
tags: ["task"]
toc: true
output:
  blogdown::html_page:
    keep_md: yes
weight: 100
---

## Introduction

In this blog post different lidR metrics and ecological indices are calculated using Lidar data. These will be used to model forest microclimate in future applications.

## Data and Methods

Only one tile from the calculated lidR catalog is used, due to computation time. The lidR catalog 
was calculated using the provided script from <https://gisma-courses.github.io/gi-modules/post/2021-11-20-forest-information-from-lidar-data/>.
Using the lidR Package, different metrics and ecological indices are calculated at grid- and voxel level. Afterwards they are stacked for convenient accessibility for future modelling of forest microclimate.

**The calculated metrics and indices are:**

- Standard deviation (SD) & Maximum, Minimum of the First Returns:
- Leaf Area Density (LAD) and Shannon Index of the LAD
- Canopy Height Model & Normalized Parameters
- Digital Terrain Model
- Point Density Metrics

**Why were these metrics/indices chosen:**

These metrics are a prototype draft and were chosen based on discussions in the Agis course and past studies. 
It was found that metrics of the first returns, the LAD and the Shannon Index seem to be correlated to temperature and can be used to predict microclimate (Carrasco et al. 2019). According to Latif et al. (2012)  elevation-based metrics might be beneficial to model microclimate in forests. DTMs could also be useful to include in a model as variables like exposition could impact the microclimate depending on the location. As it was discussed in the course, point density might also be a strong predictor for forest microclimate.




## Calculation & Results

First, visualize the LAS


```r
#plot(ras, main = "Rasterized LAS")
```

Calculate SD of the first returns with a resolution of 5m and visualize 


```r
sd_FR <- grid_metrics(las, func = sd(Z), res = 5, by_echo = "first")
plot(sd_FR, main = "SD First returns [m]")
```

<img src="index_files/figure-html/firstreturns-1.png" width="672" />

Normalize height and build CHM with standard pitfree parameters (use ?pitfree for reference)


<img src="index_files/figure-html/chm-1.png" width="672" />

Calculate Digital Terrain Model (DTM) with k-nearest neighbor approach (Reference: ?knnidw)


```r
DTM <- lidR::grid_terrain(las, res = 5.0, algorithm = lidR::knnidw(k = 10, p = 2))
```

```
## Warning: There were 5 degenerated ground points. Some X Y coordinates were
## repeated but with different Z coordinates. min Z were retained.
```

```r
lidR::plot(DTM, main = "KNN DTM with resolution = 5m")
```

<img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-1-1.png" width="672" />

```r
hist(DTM, xlab = "Elevation [m]")
```

<img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-1-2.png" width="672" />

Calculate LAD & LAD based Shannon Index


```r
LAD <- voxel_metrics(las, func = LAD(Z), res = 5)
LAD <- na.omit(LAD)

LAD_Shannon <- voxel_metrics(las, func = entropy(Z), res = 5)
LAD_Shannon <-na.omit(LAD_Shannon)
```
<img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-2-1.png" width="672" /><img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-2-2.png" width="672" />

Calculate Point density


```r
pdense <- lidR::grid_metrics(nLas, ~length(Z)/25, res = 5.0)
```
<img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png" width="672" />

Calculate some more standard metrics for the first returns and canopy height


```r
mean_FR <- grid_metrics(las, func = ~mean(Z), res = 5, by_echo = "first")
max_FR <- grid_metrics(las, func = ~max(Z), res = 5, by_echo = "first")
min_FR <- grid_metrics(las, func = ~min(Z), res = 5, by_echo = "first")

h_mean <- lidR::grid_metrics(nLas, func = ~mean(Z), res = 5.0)
h_max <- lidR::grid_metrics(nLas, func = ~max(Z), res = 5.0)
h_min <- lidR::grid_metrics(nLas, func = ~min(Z), res = 5.0)
h_sd <- lidR::grid_metrics(nLas, func = ~sd(Z), res = 5.0)
```

<img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-6-1.png" width="672" /><img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-6-2.png" width="672" /><img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-6-3.png" width="672" />

Stack all of the calculated metrics and indices together




```r
lidarstack <- stack(CHM, DTM, h_max, h_mean, h_min, h_sd, max_FR, mean_FR, min_FR, sd_FR, pdense)
names(lidarstack)
```

```
##  [1] "CHM"           "DTM"           "h_max"         "h_mean"       
##  [5] "h_min"         "h_sd"          "max_FR"        "mean_FR"      
##  [9] "min_FR"        "sd_FR"         "point_density"
```

```r
#saveRDS(lidarstack, paste0(envrmt$path_data, "lidarstack.RDS"))
plot(lidarstack)
```

<img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-8-1.png" width="672" />
## References

Carrasco, L., Giam, X., Papeş, M. & Sheldon, K.S. (2019): Metrics of Lidar-Derived 3D Vegetation Structure Reveal Contrasting Effects of Horizontal and Vertical Forest Heterogeneity on Bird Species Richness. Remote Sens. 11, 743.

Latif, Z.A. (2012): Forest Microclimate Modelling Using Remotely Sensed Data. ISrJ 2 (1), 19-25.

Roussel, J.-R., Goodbody, T.R.H. & Tompalski, P. (2021): The lidR package. https://jean-romain.github.io/lidRbook/index.html (access: 28.12.2021).
put all references here

Commit message:

adding outlook and testing because of new PC

content/post/2022-01-18-lidar-metrics-for-forest-microclimate/index.md, after:

---
title:       "About Lidar Metrics and forest microclimate"
description: "Post about which Lidar metrics can be used to describe forest microclimate and how they are calculated"
date:        2022-01-17
author:      "Ivo Jung"
image:       "img/ungabunga.jpg" 
categories: ["aGIS"]
tags: ["task"]
toc: true
output:
  blogdown::html_page:
    keep_md: yes
weight: 100
---

## Introduction

In this blog post different lidR metrics and ecological indices are calculated using Lidar data. These will be used to model forest microclimate in future applications.

## Data and Methods

Only one tile from the calculated lidR catalog is used, due to computation time. The lidR catalog 
was calculated using the provided script from <https://gisma-courses.github.io/gi-modules/post/2021-11-20-forest-information-from-lidar-data/>.
Using the lidR Package, different metrics and ecological indices are calculated at grid- and voxel level. Afterwards they are stacked for convenient accessibility for future modelling of forest microclimate.

**The calculated metrics and indices are:**

- Standard deviation (SD) & Maximum, Minimum of the First Returns
- Leaf Area Density (LAD) and Shannon Index of the LAD
- Canopy Height Model & Normalized Parameters
- Digital Terrain Model
- Point Density Metrics

**Why were these metrics/indices chosen:**

These metrics are a prototype draft and were chosen based on discussions in the Agis course and past studies. 
It was found that metrics of the first returns, the LAD and the Shannon Index seem to be correlated to temperature and can be used to predict microclimate (Carrasco et al. 2019). According to Latif et al. (2012)  elevation-based metrics might be beneficial to model microclimate in forests. DTMs could also be useful to include in a model as variables like exposition could impact the microclimate depending on the location. As it was discussed in the course, point density might also be a strong predictor for forest microclimate.




## Calculation & Results

First, visualize the LAS


```r
#plot(ras, main = "Rasterized LAS")
```

Calculate SD of the first returns with a resolution of 5m and visualize 


```r
sd_FR <- grid_metrics(las, func = sd(Z), res = 5, by_echo = "first")
plot(sd_FR, main = "SD First returns [m]")
```

<img src="index_files/figure-html/firstreturns-1.png" width="672" />

Normalize height and build CHM with standard pitfree parameters (use ?pitfree for reference)


<img src="index_files/figure-html/chm-1.png" width="672" />

Calculate Digital Terrain Model (DTM) with k-nearest neighbor approach (Reference: ?knnidw)


```r
DTM <- lidR::grid_terrain(las, res = 5.0, algorithm = lidR::knnidw(k = 10, p = 2))
```

```
## Warning: There were 5 degenerated ground points. Some X Y coordinates were
## repeated but with different Z coordinates. min Z were retained.
```

```r
lidR::plot(DTM, main = "KNN DTM with resolution = 5m")
```

<img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-1-1.png" width="672" />

```r
hist(DTM, xlab = "Elevation [m]")
```

<img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-1-2.png" width="672" />

Calculate LAD & LAD based Shannon Index


```r
LAD <- voxel_metrics(las, func = LAD(Z), res = 5)
LAD <- na.omit(LAD)

LAD_Shannon <- voxel_metrics(las, func = entropy(Z), res = 5)
LAD_Shannon <-na.omit(LAD_Shannon)
```
<img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-2-1.png" width="672" /><img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-2-2.png" width="672" />

Calculate Point density


```r
pdense <- lidR::grid_metrics(nLas, ~length(Z)/25, res = 5.0)
```
<img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png" width="672" />

Calculate some more standard metrics for the first returns and canopy height


```r
mean_FR <- grid_metrics(las, func = ~mean(Z), res = 5, by_echo = "first")
max_FR <- grid_metrics(las, func = ~max(Z), res = 5, by_echo = "first")
min_FR <- grid_metrics(las, func = ~min(Z), res = 5, by_echo = "first")

h_mean <- lidR::grid_metrics(nLas, func = ~mean(Z), res = 5.0)
h_max <- lidR::grid_metrics(nLas, func = ~max(Z), res = 5.0)
h_min <- lidR::grid_metrics(nLas, func = ~min(Z), res = 5.0)
h_sd <- lidR::grid_metrics(nLas, func = ~sd(Z), res = 5.0)
```

<img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-6-1.png" width="672" /><img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-6-2.png" width="672" /><img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-6-3.png" width="672" />

Stack all of the calculated metrics and indices together




```r
lidarstack <- stack(CHM, DTM, h_max, h_mean, h_min, h_sd, max_FR, mean_FR, min_FR, sd_FR, pdense)
names(lidarstack)
```

```
##  [1] "CHM"           "DTM"           "h_max"         "h_mean"       
##  [5] "h_min"         "h_sd"          "max_FR"        "mean_FR"      
##  [9] "min_FR"        "sd_FR"         "point_density"
```

```r
#saveRDS(lidarstack, paste0(envrmt$path_data, "lidarstack.RDS"))
plot(lidarstack)
```

<img src="index_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-8-1.png" width="672" />

## Outlook

The next post will be about cleaning the data (which should've been done partially before calculating the metrics, will also be be added) and remove autocorreclated data and setting up a data frame, which can be used to predict forest microclimate for the chosen study area.

## References

Carrasco, L., Giam, X., Papeş, M. & Sheldon, K.S. (2019): Metrics of Lidar-Derived 3D Vegetation Structure Reveal Contrasting Effects of Horizontal and Vertical Forest Heterogeneity on Bird Species Richness. Remote Sens. 11, 743.

Latif, Z.A. (2012): Forest Microclimate Modelling Using Remotely Sensed Data. ISrJ 2 (1), 19-25.

Roussel, J.-R., Goodbody, T.R.H. & Tompalski, P. (2021): The lidR package. https://jean-romain.github.io/lidRbook/index.html (access: 28.12.2021).
put all references here
